# Research Proposal
## Final deliverable of Junior Seminar
### 2022-05-18


For my senior project, I have decided upon the field of Quantum Information Theory. Quantum Information Theory is a field concerned with representing and transmitting information by using the math and probability found in Quantum Mechanics. Quantum Information Theory abstracts this to the mathematical level, where we use a mathematical construct called a matrix to represent information. For my proposed idea, I would like to develop a quantum algorithm to compute the **Fast Fourier Transform (FFT)**. The FFT is an formula that can take an input of points and turn it into a summation of periodic waves. In classical computing, we have found numerous solutions to this; however, quantum mechanically, many different methods are being developed, all of which show supremacy over the classical method `[1]`. My work would involve simulating a quantum circuit and then implementing it physically in the form of fiber optics. I will use research done in journals for Quantum Computing as a prelude to my research. Additionally, I plan to explore previously implemented algorithms in this field.

Modern research in this branch of Quantum Computing has tried to find different algorithms and formulas that can be solved with a quantum computer. From simulations to physical implementations of these circuits, quantum solutions tend to be probabilistic in nature and work off of fuzzy logic `[1,4]`. `Qiskit` is a python toolkit made by IBM for simulating quantum circuits and transpiling to various assemblies for quantum processors `[2]`. This has made the development of quantum algorithms publicly accessible, allowing the novice developer to gain experience with Quantum Computing. Qiskit renders these circuits in the same manner that they are seen in the literature, and I plan to use this toolkit for simulating circuits to apply the FFT. My personal interest is in embedded systems, so I hope to be able to design an embedded system for such a circuit once the simulations I have created prove to be effective. Because I will be using fiber optic cables and various optical components (components dealing with the nature of light), I will have to research effective methods of circuit design and stabilization in the lab. While this doesn't have very large implications in Computing, it is still worth noting. My goals in this project are to
* **1.** Design and simulate a Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) algorithm using IBM's `Qiskit` toolkit
* **2.** Attempt to develop a new algorithm or novel method of solving the FFT
* **3.** Implement a quantum circuit that does the same computation with fiber optic circuitry
* **4.** Transpile the simulation code to run it on a publicly accessible quantum computing platform online.

I have discovered that there exist numerous knowledge gaps for this project. The first of which is that I do not understand fully how we represent information in Quantum Computing. Quantum Computing is based upon **qubits**, which stands for *quantum bit*. These qubits can take many forms (e.g. trapped atoms, light sources, synthetic atoms, and even trapped gases). My research would use a light source to create qubits, meaning that each particle of light coming from a source would represent information. I have never worked with light in this manner in my experience, so I would need to spend some time understanding approaches to generating such a source. I have spent time reading textbooks on best practices when it comes to this form of quantum computing, but I will need to spend time in the lab and in the class room doing this formally. I plan to take a course on Quantum Information Theory at Lancaster University, England. Additionally, I hope to work alongside faculty who are experts in this field at Lancaster. This semester abroad will give me the proper background to begin my senior project the following fall `[3,4]`. Secondly, I do not have very much mathematical background in linear algebra. Quantum Computing, whether it be focused on physics or computer science, requires a good command of linear algebra, because every qubit is represented as a matrix of `0`s and `1`s. I believe I can learn this subject material feasibly in the next year, as I plan to start using `qiskit` and practice in my personal time with simulations `[2]`.

Some research questions I plan to ask are:
  * *How many other possible ways can we solve the FFT using quantum logic gates and quantum information representation?*
  * *What current algorithms can I simulate with `qiskit`?*
  * *How does a quantum algorithm have supremacy over a classical algorithm?*
  * *What are the disadvantages of using a quantum algorithm as opposed to a classical algorithm?*
  * *What are some abstract and information dense ways that I can process data with a quantum circuit?*
These research questions will be answered in my studying and applied work with the subject. I hope to be able to answer most of these by the end of my research; however, if I do not get the chance to, I will likely end up answering these questions in a graduate program or summer research following my senior project.

As far as feasibility is concerned, my project will be quite feasible thanks to its small scope. I have focused on making this project small so that I will leave room for research questions to be generated and explored. The only part of this project that may not be feasible is attempting to create the physical circuit that represents what simulation I create. Creating a simulation will be very feasible, as the only required element of the process is downloading the python toolkit for `qiskit`. `qiskit` offers extensive documentation for designing circuit simulations as well as mathematical documentation outlining how to approach quantum information theory mathematically. Studying in England next spring will also allow me to approach the subject matter with more intention, because of their program in this field. Allegheny doesn't offer any courses related to Quantum Information, hence I will have to bet on studying abroad for this background knowledge. If I am unable to, I will spend the summer before my senior fall studying a textbook on the subject matter. Creating a physical circuit to implement my design may prove to be less feasible, being that I will need to purchase equipment for the physics department. This will require funding and permission from the department.

Before I was fully confident of what I wanted to pursue, I designed a prototype that calculated the FFT of a group of data points. This used the Julia language, which is a functional language with a python-like syntax. I had to research a formula for the FFT as a summation rather than an integral, because I was working with a discrete set of data points. I used python to generate summations of sinusoidal waves as a set of data points, and I took the data points in as input using a program I made in Julia. This program took the sum of each x value times an exponential, which was e raised to an imaginary power. The result was a summation that I converted into terms of real numbers by using Euler's formula [4]. It would then send the output into a file with a csv format to be read by a javascript file. The javascirpt file was imported into an html file that was rendered in a web browser. I graphed the periodic waves using `plotly.js` to demonstrate that I could reconstruct the component waves I had added up, which is the function of the Fourier Transform. I created this prototype to demonstrate that I had an understanding of the function of the FFT. After I created it, I developed an intuition of its function so that I could apply it in a different context. Additionally, I applied many functional programming concepts in the creation of this tool. This will allow me to know how to properly implement it when I try to create a quantum algorithm for it. The quantum implementation of the FFT is similar to the classical FFT, except that it uses very different mathematics and passes through a quantum circuit very differently compared to a classical solution.

For my experiment, I calculated the time dependence of my program for finding Fourier Transform; in other words, the `O(n)` of my program. I ran numerous instances of my program, increasing the input and keeping track of how many sinusoidal wave summations I was feeding into the program. I used a program called `hyperfine` which brands itself as a command line benchmarking tool. It runs hundreds of instances of the same command to calculate statistical data (standard deviation, range, minimum, maximum, etc.) about the time it takes to run. I expected this to be exponential, meaning that `O(n)=a^(bn)`, where `a` and `b` are some constants. The reason why this was expected was how the program was calculating the Fourier transform: it would use lambda syntax to accumulate an increasingly large anonymous function as it took the sum of each Fourier coefficient. With the amount of memory this would take, I expected the time required to do such a calculation to grow exponentially. Instead, I found the time dependence to be linear, with a slope of about `1/3`, meaning that the time dependence was `O(n)=(1/3)n seconds`.

The results suggest that calculating a Fourier transform classically can be very complex without sacrificing much performance time. My research goal for this experiment was to discover how straight forward developing a program to calculate the Fourier transform would be. After conducting this experiment, my research questions have been focused on what other forms of data I can represent and interpret with a Fourier transform. Specifically, I have wondered if sound can be processed to indicate which notes are being played at a particular moment, as sound is composed of summations of waves of varying frequencies. I have also considered if images can be represented and interpreted by a Fourier transform, which I found to be already done in the industry.

I represented the results of my experiment as a graph in a Cartesian coordinate system of `Time` versus `n Number of inputs`. This shows how the time dependence varies with respect to the number of inputs. Once again, I input the data into a new instance of `plotly.js` in my browser. The visualization of my results was used in my presentation to the class on my research, and the class showed good understanding of my results as I explained them. I can use a visualization such as this one to demonstrate the 'quantum supremacy' of the FFT algorithm in a quantum simulation as opposed to a classical computation. Part of my research in the future may involve finding what the `O(n)` would be for the quantum algorithm I create. I can then compare the two time dependence functions to demonstrate an advantage.

An ethical concern with this research may be to ensure that the writing describing it is readable by people from both the physics and computer science community. To avoid pretentious behavior and promote unity of two separate fields, I must ensure that the manner in which I outline my research is understandable by experts in both communities. This will be one minor step bridge the knowledge gap between the two fields, and it will allow future researchers with a similar bent for interdisciplinary research to be able to jump in without being deterred by advanced jargon that could be rephrased into simpler terms.

My next steps with this project will be to spend time talking to individuals who actively research in the fields of Quantum Communication and Quantum Computing. Connecting with these individuals will fuel my research questions and spur me to form more hypotheses relevant to the fields. I will also start to tinker with `qiskit` in my free time, experimenting with a simple algorithm such as Shor's algorithm, for example. Additionally, I plan to spend a semester abroad where I will enroll in an independent study focusing on Quantum Communication and Quantum Information theory. Assuming my plans happen as planned, I will be more than prepared for when I begin my senior project in Fall 2023.

* (1) Young, R. C.; Birch, P. M.; Chatwin, C. R. In Optical Pattern Recognition XXIV, 2013; Vol. 8748, pp 17–27.
* (2) Qiskit: Open-source quantum development https://qiskit.org/.
* (3) P, M. Intl. Journal of Trend in Research and Development 2016, 3, 191–196.
* (4) Djordjevic, I., Quantum Information Processing, Quantum Computing, and Quantum Error Correction: An Engineering Approach; Academic Press: 2021.
* (5) Einstein, A.; Podolsky, B.; Rosen, N. Physical Review 1935, 47, 777–780.
* (6) Bell, J. S. Physics Physique Fizika 1964, 1, 195–200.
* (7) Kwiat, P. G.; Mattle, K.; Weinfurter, H.; Zeilinger, A.; Sergienko, A. V.; Shih, Y. Physical Review Letters 1995, 75, 4337.
* (8) Aspect, A. Phys. Rev. D 1976, 14, 1944–1951.
* (9) Hecht, E., Optics 5th edition; PearsonEdication, Inc.: 2017.
